# Fisc and market

Check my notes on Rubin.

To my knowledge, the process of redistribution of value via the state in capitalist societies has not been properly studied -- or even adequately situated conceptually.  In my view, this paper does not offer a significant contribution in either of these needed tasks.

In the Marxian categorization, over the long run, all the value redistributed via the public financing mechanism (public taxes and spending) is surplus value and not value in general (a portion of such surplus value to be sure), regardless of the legal or juridical form the redistribution may take.  This is so because if workers' consumption is limited systematically (i.e. over the long run) by the effects of net taxation/public spending, then effectively this amounts to a reduction of the value of their labor power, since the value of labor power is not determined purely in terms of the raw physiological needs of the working class, but in terms of the prevailing social, moral norms, and long-run stagnation in the workers' standard of living is a shift in the norm.

But the real problem with this submission is that it fails to grasp the issue in its full complexity.  The economists draw a distinction between the economic agents under taxation as legally codified and "tax incidence" proper, i.e. who effectively winds up "paying" the tax with a reduction in their welfare.  And, of course, who winds up "paying" the tax depends not only on the letter of tax law and spending policy, but most decisively on the conditions in the markets and on the political balance of forces (which determines how the laws are ultimately administered and adjudicated through the judicial system when their interpretation is subject to dispute).  Since the economists' traditional toolkit is limited to the study of markets, they usually (though not always, as witnessed by the neew political-economy literature) emphasize the fact that "incidence" depends on the respective elasticities of supply and demand, and then the analysis stops.  By "elasticities," they mean the degree of responsiveness of people's purchases or sales to the changes in the ultimate prices once taxes are incorporated.  For a Marxist, it is not hard to realize that working people, typically under duress of poverty and economic vulnerability, have small elasticities compared to the capitalists, who typically have plenty wiggle room.  Again, this is a roundabout way to return to Marx's point that, over the long run all taxes are surplus value.  This is in opposition to shorter periods (say during a crisis), when the workers' standard of living may be temporarily reduced via higher taxes and drastic cuts in public spending.  In this case, the taxes (net of expenditures) will include not only surplus value, but also a stolen portion of variable capital.

Again, the Marxian categorization cuts through this Gordian knot, because it starts by defining value and surplus value, not in terms of the financial or juridical fiction of legal or formal ownership, but in terms of effective disposition over the totality of society's labor time.  As a worker, *whether* the capitalist appropriates a portion of my work year to personally finance his consumption or capital accumulation *or* instead the taxman takes it away and blows it in militaristic adventures intended to prop up the rule of capital makes little strategic difference.  Basically, that portion of my own work year is alienated from me one way or the other.  This would be different, at least in part, if the taxes taken from my paycheck returned to me or my class comrades via spending on public education, health care, and social programs that not only benefit me or us workers, but that also were under some measure of democratic control.
