# Simultaneity vs. sequentialism

We must forcefully move away from a merely scholastic discussion on Marx's "economic" work.  Who wrote what, what Marx really meant here and there, etc. are questions that (if one is not to presume them irrelevant) must be clearly and categorically subordinated to the key question of which aspects of modern capitalist society we need to understand more profoundly to better inform our struggle today, to better unite the workers of the world here and now, etc.  We must refocus our mental effort on the goal of grasping the structure and dynamics of today's capitalism so we can overthrow it at the least cost.  Marx's legacy needs to be viewed as instrumental to this task, and not as an end in itself.  Please do not take this as suggesting that one should stay away from abstraction, even high abstraction, that only the concrete here and now matters, etc.  No.  All I'm suggesting is that abstraction for its own sake is not what Marxism is about.

When studying capitalist society, one must view it (1) at each point in time (structure) and (2) over each given historical period (dynamics).  These views are complementary, not mutually exclusive.  We obviously need to take up (1) and (2) in turn, and then try to obtain some synthesis that combines the insights from (1) and (2).   Things happen sequentially and what we call capitalist society today becomes capitalist society tomorrow as a result of human activity (interacting with the processes of nature), human activity that takes place over time.  What exists now is the result of what happened in the interim.  

However, this does not preclude that, what exists at any point in time (say, capitalism) is an array of more elementary substructures or "units", and that these units coexist at such point in time in a way that constitutes the totality (capitalism) , that they coexist in a combined or interrelated manner, each element in mutual support of the rest, etc.  It is not true, as Moseley is inclined to think, that the reproduction schemes are about sequence at the exclusion of simultaneity.  Consider volume 2.  At each point in time, total social capital exists in an array of forms (stocks) as (i) M (money and, more generally, financial contracts), (ii) P (productive capital in the form of MP, inclusive of semifinished commodities, and LP), and (iii) C' (finished commodities).  So there's a balance-sheet accounting identity that ties all of these capital forms (stock magnitudes) together.  In accounting terms, what exists at each point in time has some specific use and also some specific source, and the total by use must equal the total by source.  This is of necessity, and it applies to each and all points in time.  At no point in capitalist history can this be not true.

Similarly, if you take any period of time: one second, one minute, one year, one decade, or the entire history of capitalism since the 16th century.  Of necessity, stocks are summed up or integrated (in continuous time) flows.  Which is to say that flows are necessarily the differences or differentials (in continuous time) of  stocks.  Therefore, if you take any system (e.g. total social capital), the inflows and the outflows over each and any period must necessarily equal.  In other words, there is a "profit-loss" or "results" accounting identity that ties all the ins and outs over each and any period.

True, this is accounting.  Now if you're going to theorize (i.e. to construct a simple, skeletal mental analog of a capitalist society so you get a better grasp of how it approximately works in practice), then you will need not only "behavioral functions" linking the variables.  You will also, necessarily, have to tie your variables together, discipline them if you wish, by means of some "equilibrium condition" or "fixed point."  Otherwise you're cheating, i.e. you wind up with extra "degrees of freedom" that permit you to "prove" any conclusion.  Your "system" (e.g. total social capital) must abide by this basic "conservation law."  And ignoring this is exactly the fatal flaw of the TSSI, which Moseley pretty much shares.

Now, even in a framework of simultaneity, the theory may (should!) appear as a hierarchical construction, layered, with the aspects that are more essential underpinning the aspects that are more superficial.  As an illustration, when total social capital goes through the M-C-M' cycle, not only use value has been "physically" produced but also value has been socially constituted.  So, here the capitalists, and (trailed along) the workers, have reproduced themselves materially, but have also by the same token reproduced the social conditions that make capital a persistent, relatively stable historical phenomenon.  

At least in Marx's Capital (and, correctly, if you ask me) the determination of the value of the net output produced in the cycle is more essential than the fact that this value is directly appropriated by the capitalists, that out of it a portion goes to covering variable capital outlays paid out to the workers, and only the rest, the surplus value, appears as income for the capitalists, etc.  There's a theoretical hierarchy here, which escaped Bortkiewicz and then the Sraffians.  In this account, value formation is more essential than the "distributional" split of value added into variable capital and surplus value, which is in turn more essential than the competitive process that transforms surplus value into profit, interest, rent, etc.  

This is theory, as it should be.  Yet in the real world, there are no actions that people undertake to produce value and value alone, separate from the actions by which people reproduce their division as capitalists and workers, and also separate from the actions that transform non-worker income into the income categories of all sorts of social parasites.  No, the same actions, at each point in time and for each period of time, both constitute value and distribute value between the main social classes, and also at once recycles the surplus value among particular groups of nonworkers, etc.  Not grasping this is rejecting abstraction, which is to say theory in general.

The Perron-Frobenius theorem does imply that, under the usual conditions (irreducibility, etc.), as the coefficients of the input-output matrix become larger, then the dominant root of the new matrix will be greater than the dominant root of the previous matrix.  So, it seems to me (though I haven't yet verified it) that it is fair to say that the average "capital" productivity (the productivity of the "material input flows," which bounds the "average profit rate" from above) will decrease, regardless of distribution.  However, can this be construed as evidence in favor of Marx's falling profit rate story?  I guess... if workers hold the rock ensuring a fixed wage share (or exploitation rate).  But is that the premise of Marx's story?
